# dcs-si-exporter

Digital Combat Simulator (DCS) scripts to integrate with [SayIntentions](https://www.sayintentions.ai/) via their [simAPI](https://www.sayintentions.ai/simapi).

This exporter uses the SayIntentions simAPI to allow DCS pilots to use any of SayIntentions products (currently Entourage and Premium).

(Thanks to Brian and all the SayIntentions crew for spiking this simAPI so quickly!)


## Table of Contents

* [Current Status](#current-status)
  * [MVP Requirements](#mvp-requirements)
* [Package Files](#package-files)
* [Install and Usage](#install-and-usage)
  * [Optional DCS RealWeather](#optional-dcs-weather)
* [Uninstall](#uninstall)
* [SimBrief Profiles](#simbrief-profiles)
* [Places To Fly](#places-to-fly)
* [Input Date](#input-data)
* [Development](#development)
* [Thank You](#thank-you)
* [License](#license)
  * [dkjson](#dkjson)
  * [DCS-SimpleRadioStandalone](#dcs-simpleradiostandalone)
  * [dcs-real-weather](#dcs-real-weather)



## Current Status

Open Beta  0.9.8

All the required features to support simAPI are now available in all maps and aircraft.

A generic aircraft implementation allows radios and transponders to be set virtually by the SI client without requiring 
mode3, or VHF radios (Spit, Corsair, etc) but also allows ANY aircraft or helicopter in DCS to work with SI out of the box without having to 
support it specifically.

Supported aircraft allow frequency, transponder (mode3) and ident from within the cockpit. I've refactored the aircraft modules
to be easy to implement if people want to chip in for aircraft I don't have. Many thanks to the SRS project!

Please give feedback and issues in [Discussions](https://github.com/coldnebo/dcs-si-exporter/discussions)
first to give us a chance to provide answers for common problems. Bugs will be split off and tracked in [Issues](https://github.com/coldnebo/dcs-si-exporter/issues).  Please read the current features and limitations before 
creating issues. 

Thanks!


### MVP Requirements

Features and Current Status:

* implement [SayIntensions simAPI](https://sayintentionsai.freshdesk.com/support/solutions/articles/154000221017-simapi-developer-howto-integrating-sayintentions-ai-with-any-flight-simulator)
  * `simAPI_input.json` - input to the SayIntentions client from this exporter
    * [DONE] setup default structure, required and optional parameters and types
    * All required fields implemented or hardcoded for now.
    * only COM1 supported 
    * only VHF radio mapped to COM1
    * COM2 disabled
    * transponder mode3 code now supported and hardcoded ALT on.
    * transponder IDENT button is available (in implemented aircraft)

  * `simAPI_output.jsonl` - output from the SayIntensions client to this exporter (append on update)
  	* [DONE] clear after read
    * can set COM1 from SayIntentions client / AI CoPilot
    * can set transponder

* Aircraft Supported
  * `F-16C_50`
  * `FA-18C_hornet`
  * `F-5E-3`
  * `A-10C`
  * All other aircraft use a default implementation that gives you basic functionality using only the SI client to tune frequencies!

* Maps Supported
  * Caucasus
  * Marianas
  * Nevada
  * Persian Gulf
  * all maps are now supported automatically! magvar is calculated and does not need to be looked up from map data any more.




## Package Files

```
SayIntentionsExport\
  aircraft\
    A-10C.lua
    F-16C_50.lua
    F-5E-3.lua
    FA-18C_hornet.lua
  aircraft.lua
  dcs-si-exporter-LICENSE.txt
  dkjson.lua
  dkjson_readme.txt
  realweatherapi.lua
  SayIntentionsExport.lua
  simapi.lua
```

## Install and Usage


### Manual Install

1. Download the latest zip.

2. Unzip and put the directory in your `%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS.openbeta\Mods\Services` directory.

3. In your `%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS.openbeta\Scripts\Export.lua` add the following lines:

```lua
-- In Export.lua:
pcall(function() 
    local silfs=require('lfs');
    local mod_dir = silfs.writedir()..[[Mods\Services\SayIntentionsExport\]];
    _G.SIEXPORT_BASE_DIR = mod_dir;
    dofile(mod_dir..[[SayIntentionsExport.lua]]); 
end,nil)
```

4. In your `%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS.openbeta\Mods\Services\SayIntentionsExport` folder, create a file named `si_config.lua` with the following (MAKE SURE TO END PATHS WITH TRAILING SLASHES):

```lua
-- Auto-generated by Inno Setup on install.
return {
  app_version = "0.9.8",
  sayintentions_path = [[C:\Users\lkyra\AppData\Local\SayIntentionsAI\]],
  realweather_path = [[D:\games\dcs_apps\realweather_v2.3.0\]]
}
```


### Installer


1. Download the [latest release](https://github.com/coldnebo/dcs-si-exporter/releases) SayIntentionsExportInstaller.exe.

2. Run SayIntentionsExportInstaller.exe.

3. You will be prompted for two locations.

   a. Your DCS settings folder -- you can find this by typing `Windows + R` and pasting in one of the following and clicking OK to open a File Explorer in the correct location:

     * `%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS`
     * `%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS.openbeta`

   under that folder, make sure that `Mods\Services` exists.

   b. If you use the [DCS RealWeather](https://github.com/evogelsa/dcs-real-weather) tool, specify where you unzipped that tool in the 
   second prompt.  This will make sure that your scripts use the 
   correct location to read the realweather.log file.

4. Finish the install.

5. startup DCS, choose an aircraft and a starting location (i.e. F-16, Nellis, Nevada)

   once the simulation is running you should see the following files in the following locations which
   will let you know the program is running:

    * `%LOCALAPPDATA%\SayIntentionsAI\dcs-si-exporter.log`
    * `%LOCALAPPDATA%\SayIntentionsAI\simAPI_input.json`

   you can check the `dcs-si-exporter.log` for any errors if things seem to not be working.

6. startup the SayIntentions.ai client application. you should additionally see this file appear: 

    * `%LOCALAPPDATA%\SayIntentionsAI\simAPI_output.jsonl`

Congratulations, if you see those files your install should be working. You can try VFR or IFR flights. 

Nellis (KLSV) to Laughlin (KIFP) is a good IFR flight as both are towered airports.


### Optional DCS RealWeather

If you have the [DCS RealWeather](https://github.com/evogelsa/dcs-real-weather) tool, you can 
generate a mission using real weather. [Follow the directions](https://github.com/evogelsa/dcs-real-weather/blob/main/cmd/realweather/README.md) 
in that project to install and setup your directory. 

After the first time you run the app it will generate a file `realweather.log` containing information that this mod can read.

If you specified this directory during install it will allow ATC to report real world baro pressure. Otherwise you can ignore it.

To use this, you would follow these steps before the flight:

1. edit `config.toml` to point at a mission map with a player aircraft setup per the DCS realweather instructions.
2. run `realweather.exe` to fetch the current weather and write the `realweather.log` file.
3. start DCS and load the generated `realweather` mission created from your `config.toml` configuration. 


## Uninstall

1. open "Add or Remove Programs"

2. type "SayIntentions Exporter" into the filter and select it.

3. click "Uninstall" and follow the prompts.


## SimBrief Profiles

If you need profiles for SimBrief flight planning, here are some profiles you can use.

* F-16C_50
  * https://flightsim.to/file/75958/f16-fighting-falcon-viper-simbrief-profile-by-xhaferico-bty007

* FA-18C_hornet
  * https://flightsim.to/file/69124/boeing-f18-hornet-simbrief-profile-by-imsamu-bty007

* F-5E-3
  * [F5E Simbrief Profile](https://dispatch.simbrief.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--)


## Places to Fly

Here are lists of airports that are modeled in DCS and exist with charts in Navigraph. These should have
good nav data for flights with SayIntentions. (Other airports exist in one or the other, but don't have 
charts.)

Here is a Google Map [showing these airports](https://www.google.com/maps/d/edit?mid=17LsH1wD7aLzbGcjq3vYdhXnbpZUCl78&usp=sharing) on the map if you want to know where they are.

UPDATE: We now support ALL maps for DCS, so any map you have will work. This greatly expands the list of available airports past these 4 areas. 
I'll leave this up, but you can also do your flight planning by looking in the DCS Mission editor and looking for airports that have working ILS/TACAN and then
searching Navigraph for the ICAO code of that airport. Most of the time this will get you the charts to fly. ENJOY!


### Caucasus

Georgia

* UGSB - Batumi
* UGKO - Kutaisi
* UGTB - Tbilisi

Russia

* URSS - Sochi
* URKK - Krasnodar
* URKA - Anapa
* URMM - Mineralnye Vody
* URMN - Nalchik
* URMO - Beslan

### Persian Gulf

United Arab Emirates 

* OMAA - Zayed International
* OMAD - Al Bateen Executive
* OMAL - Al Ain International
* OMDW - Al Maktoum International
* OMDB - Dubai International
* OMSJ - Sharjai International
* OMRK - Ras Al Khaimah International
* OMFJ - Fujairah International

Iran

* OIBA - Abu Musa Airport
* OIBS - Siri International Airport
* OIBV - Lavan Airport
* OIBK - Kish International
* OIBL - Bandar Lengeh International
* OIKQ - Qeshm International
* OIKB - Bandar Abbas International
* OISL - Larestan International
* OIKJ - Jiroft Airport
* OISS - Shiraz Shahid International
* OIKK - Kerman International


### Nevada

Arizona

* KIFP - Laughlin/Bullhead 

Nevada

* KHND - Henderson Executive
* KBVU - Boulder City Municipal
* KLAS - Harry Reid International
* KVGT - North Las Vegas
* KLSV - Nellis Air Force Base
* 67L - Mesquite Municipal


### Marianas

Guam

* PGUA - Andersen Air Force Base
* PGUM - Antonio B. Won Pat International

Rota

* PGRO - Rota International

Tinian

* PGWT - Tinian International

Saipan

* PGSN - Saipan International



## Input Data


* `COM ACTIVE FREQUENCY:1` 
  * support 8.333KHz channel spacing
  * read from supported aircraft or from SI client for other aircraft.

* `MAGVAR`
  * now calculated from the difference between true heading and mag yaw. mapapi is unnecessary and has been removed for simplicity.
    as a result all maps are supported.

* `PLANE ALT ABOVE GROUND MINUS CG`
  * F-16C seems to be 5 feet above the ground when on the ground so hard-coded offset -5.
  * [DONE] per plane map of offsets - this is implemented specifically in supported aircraft if necessary, but a default of -10 is available 
    to all aircraft.

* `SEA LEVEL PRESSURE`
  * [OPTIONAL] Reading from [DCS Real Weather mod](https://github.com/evogelsa/dcs-real-weather)
  * defaults to 29.92 if not using real-weather.

* `TRANSPONDER CODE:1`
  * can be set from SayIntentions Client by clicking on frequencies
  * read from supported aircraft

* `TRANSPONDER IDENT` - NA
  * [DONE] This is implemented now in the supported aircraft. There is no default implementation so other aircraft don't have this capability.

* `TRANSPONDER STATE:1` 
  * hardcoded to 4 (ALT ON, mode C)
  * [TODO] implement other modes? this is a nice to have, but probably OFF and ALT make sense.
           0 = Off, 1 = Standby, 2 = Test, 3 = On, 4 = Alt, 5 = Ground

* [TODO] Optional fields?
  * `ZULU TIME` and `LOCAL TIME` maybe from mission data?

example

```json
{
  "sim":{
    "simapi_version":"1.0",
    "name":"DCS World",
    "variables":{
      "AIRSPEED INDICATED":4,
      "AIRSPEED TRUE":0,
      "AMBIENT WIND DIRECTION":132.16537114901,
      "AMBIENT WIND VELOCITY":1.7780601581039,
      "CIRCUIT COM ON:1":1,
      "CIRCUIT COM ON:2":0,
      "COM ACTIVE FREQUENCY:1":121.9,
      "COM ACTIVE FREQUENCY:2":0,
      "COM RECEIVE:1":1,
      "COM RECEIVE:2":0,
      "COM TRANSMIT:1":1,
      "COM TRANSMIT:2":0,
      "ELECTRICAL MASTER BATTERY:0":1,
      "ENGINE TYPE":1,
      "INDICATED ALTITUDE":261,
      "LOCAL TIME":0,
      "MAGNETIC COMPASS":39.300330680186,
      "MAGVAR":-0.3194656760374,
      "PLANE ALT ABOVE GROUND MINUS CG":-4,
      "PLANE BANK DEGREES":-0.00050370070884574,
      "PLANE HEADING DEGREES TRUE":39.619796356223,
      "PLANE LATITUDE":13.480007124883,
      "PLANE LONGITUDE":144.79835748827,
      "PLANE PITCH DEGREES":-0.31470982390992,
      "PLANE TOUCHDOWN LATITUDE":13.480007124883,
      "PLANE TOUCHDOWN LONGITUDE":144.79835748827,
      "PLANE TOUCHDOWN NORMAL VELOCITY":-1,
      "PLANE_ALTITUDE":261,
      "SEA LEVEL PRESSURE":2991,
      "SIM ON GROUND":1,
      "TOTAL WEIGHT":51900,
      "TRANSPONDER CODE:1":6737,
      "TRANSPONDER IDENT":0,
      "TRANSPONDER STATE:1":4,
      "TYPICAL DESCENT RATE":2000,
      "VERTICAL SPEED":-1,
      "WHEEL RPM:0":0,
      "WHEEL RPM:1":0,
      "ZULU TIME":39221
    },
    "adapter_version":"0.9.8",
    "version":"2.9",
    "exe":"DCS.exe"
  }
}
```




## Development

* git clone this repo to a project directory

* remove the 

* start PowerShell in Admin mode to create a symlink:

```
New-Item -ItemType SymbolicLink -Path "%UserProfile%\Saved Games\DCS.openbeta\Scripts\SayIntentionsExport" -Value "path-to-project-dir\dcs-si-exporter\SayIntentionsExport"
```

* to run without DCS:

```
lua testshim.lua
```

But this was used at the start of the refactor and there are a lot of DCS APIs added since that would need to be mocked. It's probably easiest to run in DCS for now.


## Thank You

Thanks to SRS, DCS-BIOS and MOOSE for their projects.

[DCS Simple Radio Standalone](https://github.com/ciribob/DCS-SimpleRadioStandalone) provided insight as to 
how to dig into DCS structures. I directly adapted some of the details in the aircraftapi and reference 
that project in the License below.

I haven't used the following directly for implementation, but they are on the short list of must-have 
resources for DCS programming:

[DCS-BIOS](https://github.com/DCS-Skunkworks/dcs-bios) because they 
are a key source in many of the SRS files.  I haven't used their debugging and exploration tool yet, but 
I am convinced that it is probably the only way to systematically explore and reverse engineer the internal
apis in DCS.

[MOOSE](https://github.com/FlightControl-Master/MOOSE) has information that has been helpful.



## License

`SayIntentionsExport.lua` is released via the [GPLv3 License here](./SayIntentionsExport/dcs-si-exporter-LICENSE.txt).  This is now included with the redistribution zip.

* 2025-04-13 Why did you change your license?

Because while I did not copy code verbatim from the DCS SRS project, there were several times I did deep 
dives into that project to understand the low level apis in DCS, so I want to more formally credit Ciran Fisher
and the contributors to SRS for their hard work.


### dkjson

* MIT License

The `dkjson` package is included as [licensed here](./SayIntentionsExport/dkjson_readme.txt) and distributed with this script for reading and writing JSON formats from lua. Many thanks to David Heiko Kolf for this lua json library!

* https://github.com/LuaDist/dkjson


### DCS-SimpleRadioStandalone

* GPLv3 License

The aircraftapi portion of this library was informed heavily by [DCS Simple Radio Standalone](https://github.com/ciribob/DCS-SimpleRadioStandalone), so while I did
not copy code from that project, I did discover data structures and access from that project and want to recognize
Ciaran Fisher for the hard work in discovering those undocumented APIs from various other people in the DCS community. 

For example, I never would have figured out how to read the F/A-18 scratchpad for the mode3 IFF transponder code
as quickly. This saved a large amount of trial and error, so I changed my license to match his and reference
where I adapted code from that project for `aircraftapi.lua`.

* https://github.com/ciribob/DCS-SimpleRadioStandalone


### dcs-real-weather

If you are using DCS real Weather mod, this mod can read that 
baro pressure setting and use it. otherwise baro defaults to 29.92.

* https://github.com/evogelsa/dcs-real-weather
